anyone in the room thought about sex
today yeah you did thank you for putting
your hand up of it well I'm here to
provide you with some biological
validation for your sordid daydreams I'm
here to tell you a few things that you
might not have known about wild sex
now when humans think about sex male and
female forms are generally what come to
mind but for many millions of years such
specific categories didn't even exist
sex was a mere fusion of bodies or a
trickle of DNA shared between two or
more beings it wasn't until about 500
million years ago that we start to see
structures akin to a penis or a thing
that gives DNA out and a vagina
something that receives it now
invariably you're probably thinking
about what belongs to our own species
these very familiar structures but the
diversity that we see in sexual
structures in the animal kingdom that
has evolved in response to the multitude
of factors surrounding reproduction is
pretty mind-blowing penile diversity is
especially profuse so this is a paper
Nautilus it's a close relative of squid
and octopus and males have a hectic at
Ellis just what is a hectic at Ellis a
detachable swimming penis it leaves the
male of the body finds the female
through pheromonal cues in the water
attaches itself to her body and deposits
the sperm for many decades biologists
actually felt that the hectic at Ellis
was a separate organism altogether now
the tapir is a mammal from South America
and the tapir has a prehensile penis it
actually has a level of dexterity in its
penis much akin to what we have with our
hands and it uses this dexterity to
bypass the vagina altogether and deposit
sperm directly into the female's uterus
not to mention it's a pretty good size
the biggest penis in the animal kingdom
however is not that at the tapir the
biggest penis to body size ratio in the
animal kingdom actually belongs to the
metre beach barnacle and this video is
actually showing you what the human
penis would look like if it were the
same size as that of a barnacle so with
all of this diversity in structure one
might think then that penises are
fitting neatly into vaginas all over the
place for the purposes of successful
reproduction simply insert part a into
slot B and we should all be good to go
but of course that doesn't exactly
happen and that's because we can't just
take form into account we have to think
about function as well and when it comes
to sex function relates to the
contributions made by the gametes or the
sperm and the eggs and these
contributions are far from equal eggs
are very expensive to make so it makes
sense for females to be very choosy
about who she shares them with sperm on
the other hand is abundant and cheap so
it makes more sense for males to have a
more sexist better strategy when it
comes to siring members of future
generations so how do animals cope with
these vary in congruent needs between
the sexes I mean if a female doesn't
choose a particular male or if she has
the ability to store sperm and she
simply has enough and it makes more
sense for her to spend her time doing
other biologically relevant things
avoiding predators taking care of
offspring gathering and ingesting food
this is of course bad news for any male
who has yet to make a deposit in her
sperm bank and this sets the scene for
some pretty drastic strategies for
successful fertilization
this is bedbug sex and it's aptly termed
traumatic insemination males have a
spiked barbed penis that they literally
stab into the female and they don't stab
it anywhere near her vagina they stab it
anywhere in her body and the sperm
simply migrates through her hemolymph to
her ovaries if a female gets too many
stab wounds or if a stab wounds happened
to become infected she can actually die
from it now if you've ever been out for
a nice peaceful walk by the lake and
happened to see some Ducks having sex
you've undoubtedly been alarmed because
it looks like gang rape and quite
frankly that's exactly what it is a
group of males will grab a female hold
her down and ballistically ejaculate
their spiral-shaped penis into her
corkscrew-shaped vagina over and over
and over again from flaccid to
ejaculation in less than a second now
the female actually gets the last laugh
though because she can actually
manipulate her posture so as to allowed
the sperm of certain suitors better
access to her ovaries I like to share
stories like this with my audiences
because see how humans we tend to think
sex sex is fun sex is good there's
romance and there's orgasm but orgasm
didn't actually evolve this is about 65
million years ago with the advent of
mammals but some animals had it going on
quite a bit before that there are some
more primitive ways of pleasing once
partner earwig males have either really
large penile appendages or really small
ones it's a very simple genetically
inherited trait and the males are not
otherwise any different those that have
long penile appendages are not bigger or
stronger or otherwise any different at
all
so going back to our biological minds
then we might think that females should
choose to have sex with the guys that
have the shorter appendages because she
can use her time for other things
avoiding predators taking care of young
finding and ingesting food but
biologists have repeatedly observed that
females choose to have sex with the
males that have the long appendages why
do they do this well according to the
biological literature during copulation
the genitalia of certain males may
elicit a more favorable female responses
through superior mechanical or
stimulatory interaction with the female
reproductive tract these are Mexican
Guppies and what you see on their upper
maxilla is an outgrowth of epidermal
filaments and these filaments basically
form a fish
moo-stache if you will now males have
been observed to prod the females
genital opening prior to copulating with
her and in what I have lovingly turned
the magnum p.i hypothesis females are
overwhelmingly more likely to be found
with males that have these fish
mustaches they look at the porn for you
right there so we've seen very different
strategies that males are using when it
comes to winning a female partner we've
seen a coercion strategy in which sexual
structures are used in a forceful way to
basically make a female have sex we've
also seen a titillation strategy where
males are actually seizing their female
partners into choosing them as a sex
partner now unfortunately in the animal
kingdom
it's the coercion strategy that we see
time and time again it's very common in
many phyla from invertebrates to avian
species mammals and of course even in
primates now interestingly there are a
few mammalian species in which females
have evolved specialized genitalia that
doesn't allow for sexual coercion to
take place female elephants and female
hyenas have a penile clitoris or an
enlarged collateral - that hangs
externally much like a penis and in fact
it's very difficult to sex these animals
by merely looking at their external
morphology so before a male can insert
his penis into a female's vagina she has
to take this penile clitoris and
basically inside-out it in her own body
I mean imagine putting a penis into
another penis it's simply not gonna
happen unless the female is on board
with the action now even more
interesting is the fact that elephant
and hyena societies are entirely
matriarchal they're run by females
groups of females sisters aunts and
offspring and when young males attain
sexual maturity their turfed out of the
group in hyena societies adult males are
actually the lowest on the social scale
they can take part in a kill only after
everybody else including the offspring
so it seems that when you take the penis
power away from a male you take away all
the social power
yes so what am I take home messages from
my talk today well you know sex is just
so much more than insert part a into
slot B and hope that the offspring run
around everywhere else the sexual
strategies and reproductive structures
that we see in the animal kingdom
basically dictate how males and females
will react to each other which then
dictates how populations in societies
form and evolve so it may not be
surprising to any of you that animals
including ourselves spend a good amount
of time thinking about sex but what
might surprise you is the extent to
which so many other aspects of their
lives and our lives are influenced by it
so thank you and happy daydreaming
[Applause]
[Music]